LEVEL 1.1: Your First Control
1. Introduction
In this lesson, you will build your first working ESP32 program.
You will control a small LED using blocks and make it turn ON. This is the first time you will see how instructions you create in the system directly affect a physical (or simulated) output.
[image: section_0.png]
The goal of this lesson is not just to make the LED turn on, but to understand that:
Your blocks are instructions
The ESP32 executes those instructions
The output changes based on your instructions
By the end of this lesson, you will have created a complete working cycle of input instructions that produce visible behaviour.
2. Exploration
Available Blocks
Set Pin Mode
Digital Write HIGH
Exploration Goal
In this phase, there is no fixed task. You are encouraged to experiment freely with the blocks to understand how each one behaves.
You can:
Connect blocks in any order
Try different combinations of HIGH and LOW
Change the sequence of actions
Observe how the LED responds
Suggested Exploration Questions
What happens if you only use HIGH?
What happens if you remove the delay?
What happens if LOW comes before HIGH?
What happens if you increase delay time?
Can you make the LED stay ON permanently?
Purpose of Exploration
The purpose here is to build intuition before formal explanation. You are not expected to understand everything yet. You are expected to observe patterns and outcomes.
3. Concept Building
3.1 What is ESP32?
The ESP32 is a small programmable microcontroller. A microcontroller is a compact computing device designed to interact with physical components such as lights, sensors, and motors.
[image: section_1.jpg]
The ESP32 can also be called a mini version of a computer as it is a compact computer that has been designed for tasks that require specific control and instructions.
Unlike a normal computer, which is designed for general-purpose tasks like browsing or running applications, the ESP32 is designed for control tasks.
Its main purpose is to:
Receive instructions
Execute those instructions repeatedly
Control physical outputs based on those instructions
Read inputs from the environment
In this lesson, the ESP32 is being used as a controller for an LED.
3.2 What are Blocks?
In this system, you are not writing traditional code. Instead, you are using blocks.
Each block represents a specific instruction that the ESP32 understands.
For example:
A block can set a pin mode
A block can turn a signal ON
A block can turn a signal OFF
A block can introduce a delay
Blocks are executed in sequence from top to bottom. This means the order in which you arrange them matters.
This block-based interface allows you to create programs visually by linking blocks together, much like assembling building pieces. Each block represents a specific instruction that the ESP32 can understand, and the system automatically translates your block arrangement into executable code.
This approach is designed to make programming more intuitive, especially for beginners, by removing the need to memorize syntax and instead focusing on logic and program flow.
[image: section_2.png]
[image: section_3.png]
To use it, you simply select the required block from the sidebar and drag it into the workspace, placing it where you want it to connect.
[image: section_4.png]
3.3 What is a Pin?
A pin is a physical connection point on the ESP32.
Each pin can be thought of as a control interface between the ESP32 and external components.
Pins can:
Send electrical signals (output)
Receive electrical signals (input)
In this lesson, we use a pin as an output to control an LED.
[image: section_5.png]
When a pin is connected to an LED:
The ESP32 controls whether electricity flows to the LED
This determines whether the LED turns ON or OFF
3.4 Why do we set Pin Mode?
Before using a pin, we must define its behaviour.
This is done using “Set Pin Mode”.
[image: section_6.png]
A pin can operate in different modes, but in this lesson, we only use:
Output Mode
Output mode means:
The ESP32 will send signals out through the pin
It will control external components like LEDs
Without setting pin mode correctly:
The ESP32 may not behave as expected
The pin may not respond properly to output commands
This step is required because the ESP32 needs to know how each pin will be used before executing instructions.
3.5 What is Digital Write (HIGH and LOW)?
Digital signals have only two states:
HIGH and LOW
HIGH means:
Electrical signal is ON
Current flows through the pin
The LED turns ON
LOW means:
Electrical signal is OFF
No current flows through the pin
The LED turns OFF
This is called digital control because it uses only two values instead of a range of values.
[image: section_7.png]
You are essentially switching electricity on and off through instructions.
3.6 What actually happens when your program runs?
When you connect your blocks, the ESP32 executes them in order.
(image to be updated)
Step-by-step process:
The ESP32 reads the first block
It sets the pin mode to output
It moves to the next block and turns the LED ON that is connected at Pin 2.
It moves to next block, and turns the LED OFF that is connect at Pin 2.
This repetition is automatic and built into the system.
Even though you only created the sequence once, the ESP32 keeps running it repeatedly.
This is why the LED keeps blinking.
3.8 Key Insight of This Lesson
The most important concept in this lesson is:
You are not manually repeating actions. The system is repeating them for you.
Your block sequence becomes a cycle that runs continuously.
This is the foundation of all embedded systems behaviour.
4. Student Task
Task: Create Your First LED Control System
Your objective is to create a system that:
Turns an LED ON
Turns the LED OFF
Requirements
Use Set Pin Mode correctly
Use Digital Write HIGH and LOW
Ensure correct order of execution
Expected Behavior
When the system runs:
The LED should turn ON
Then immediately it should turn OFF
It will alternate between on and off
5. Arduino Mapping
Generated Code
void setup() {
pinMode(2, OUTPUT);
}
void loop() {
digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
delay(1000);
digitalWrite(2, LOW);
delay(1000);
}
Code Explanation
pinMode(2, OUTPUT);
This configures pin 2 as an output pin so it can control external devices.
digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
This sends a HIGH signal to the pin, turning the LED ON.
delay(1000);
This pauses execution for 1 second so the LED state is visible.
digitalWrite(2, LOW);
This sends a LOW signal, turning the LED OFF.
delay(1000);
This pauses again before the cycle repeats.
Execution Flow
Setup runs once and configures the pin
LED turns ON
LED turns OFF
System waits
Loop repeats indefinitely
End of Lesson 1.1